Protein in Urine
Email this page to a friend Print Facebook X Pinterest
What is a protein in urine test?
A protein in urine test measures how much protein is in your urine (pee). Normally, you have very little protein in your urine. A large amount of protein in urine (proteinuria) may mean you have a kidney problem. Your kidneys are organs that filter extra water and waste out of your blood to make urine.

Proteins are large molecules that are essential for your body to work properly. They have many important functions, including giving your body energy, rebuilding muscles, and helping your immune system. Protein is found in all parts of your body, including your blood. When your kidneys clean waste from your blood, tiny filters prevent the large protein molecules from leaving your body through your urine.

If there is a problem with your kidneys, protein can leak into your urine. High protein levels in your urine over a period of time may be the first sign that kidney disease or another condition has damaged the filters in your kidneys. A protein in urine test can help you find kidney damage early. This may help your health care provider determine the best treatment. You can also start making changes to protect your kidneys.

Other names: urine protein, 24-hour urine protein; urine total protein; ratio; reagent strip urinalysis

What is it used for?
A protein in urine test is often part of a urinalysis, which may include a visual check of your urine (pee) sample, tests for certain chemicals, and an examination under a microscope to look for certain types of cells. A urinalysis is used to check your general health, including the health of your urinary tract (which includes your kidneys, ureters, bladder, and urethra). This test may also be used to diagnose or monitor kidney disease and other health problems.

Why do I need a protein in urine test?
Your provider may order a protein in urine test as part of your routine checkup, to monitor a condition affecting your kidneys, or if you have symptoms of kidney disease. With some types of kidney disease, such as chronic kidney disease, you may not have symptoms until the later stages of the disease. These symptoms may include:

Swelling in the hands and feet or puffy eyelids
Dry skin, itching, or numbness
Fatigue
Increased or decreased urination
Urine that is bloody or foamy
Loss of appetite and weight loss
Muscle cramps
Nausea and vomiting
Shortness of breath
Sleep problems
Trouble thinking clearly
Protein in urine may be an early sign of kidney disease before you have symptoms. So your provider may order a protein in urine test if you have a high risk for kidney disease. You're more likely to develop kidney disease if you have:

A family history of kidney disease
Diabetes
High blood pressure
Heart disease
Taking certain prescription and over-the-counter medicines can damage your kidneys, too. For example, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen and naproxen sodium) can harm your kidneys if you take them for a long period or if you have certain medical conditions. Talk with your provider about your risk for kidney disease.

What happens during a protein in urine test?
You will need to give a urine sample for the test. A health care professional may give you a cleansing wipe, a small container, and instructions for how to use the "clean catch" method to collect your urine sample. It's important to follow these instructions so that germs from your skin don't get into the sample:

Wash your hands with soap and water and dry them.
Open the container without touching the inside.
Clean your genital area with the cleansing wipe:
For a penis, wipe the entire head (end) of the penis. If you have a foreskin, pull it back first.
For a vagina, separate the labia (the folds of skin around the vagina) and wipe the inner sides from front to back.
Urinate into the toilet for a few seconds and then stop the flow. Start urinating again, this time into the container. Don't let the container touch your body.
Collect at least an ounce or two of urine into the container. The container should have markings to show how much urine is needed.
Finish urinating into the toilet.
Put the cap on the container and return it as instructed.
If you have hemorrhoids that bleed or are having your menstrual period, tell your provider before your test.

In certain cases, your provider may ask you to collect all of your urine during a 24-hour period. A "24-hour urine sample test" may provide more complete results because the amount of protein and other substances in your urine can vary throughout the day.

Will I need to do anything to prepare for the test?
You don't need any special preparations to test for protein in urine. If your provider has ordered a 24-hour urine sample, you will be given a special container to collect your urine and instructions on how to collect and store your samples.

Are there any risks to the test?
There is no known risk to having a urinalysis or a protein in urine test.

What do the results mean?
If your result is negative, your urine did not contain too much protein when you were tested.

If a large amount of protein is found in your urine sample, it doesn't always mean you have a medical problem that needs treatment. Your urine protein levels can also be high for a short time because of:

Strenuous exercise
Dehydration
Your diet
Stress
Pregnancy
Your provider may recommend other urinalysis tests to see whether you continue to have a high protein level in your urine over time. If your urine protein remains high, it is likely a sign of kidney disease or kidney damage from other conditions.

The amount of protein in your urine is linked to the amount of kidney damage you may have. But you will need more tests to diagnose what is causing the damage. To learn what your results mean, talk with your provider.

Learn more about laboratory tests, reference ranges, and understanding results.

Is there anything else I need to know about a protein in urine test?
At-home test kits that check for protein in urine tests are available without a prescription. The kits usually include dipsticks and instructions for how to collect and test your urine sample. At-home urine tests are easy to do and provide accurate results as long as you carefully follow all instructions. Ask your provider which protein in urine test is best for you.

Show references
Related Health Topics
Chronic Kidney Disease
Diabetic Kidney Problems
Kidney Diseases
Kidney Tests
Urinalysis
Related Medical Tests
Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies (ANCA) Test
Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) Test
How to Cope with Medical Test Anxiety
How to Understand Your Lab Results
Immunoglobulins Blood Test
Microalbumin Creatinine Ratio
Mucus in Urine